---
layout: article
title: Writing a Flexible Terraform Module for vSphere Virtual Machines - Pt 1
tags: terraform, module
article_header:
  type: overlay
---

How flexible can, or should, I make a Terraform module for deploying virtual machines in vSphere?

<!--more-->

[Terraform](https://www.terraform.io/) is a powerful tool for [infrastructure as code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Infrastructure_as_code), but one  of the primary challenges I've encountered while learning it is the structure of its conditionals.

vSphere modules that I've come across in searches have tended to be fairly rigid in their implementations. That's not to say it's the wrong approach. My intent is to see how many scenarios a vSphere module can feasibly accommodate and, ultimately, see if the complexity becomes too unwieldy to make it worth the effort. In the process, I expect to become more familiar with the challenge I described earlier: terraform's implementation of conditionals.

Before starting, I need to define the scope of the module.

### Data Sources to Include

For my use case, I've narrowed the data sources down to the following:

- vsphere_datacenter
- vsphere_compute_cluster
- vsphere_host
- vsphere_datastore
- vsphere_datastore_cluster
- vsphere_folder
- vsphere_network
- vsphere_virtual_machine

### Resources to Include

This one is pretty straightforward, since all I'll need is **vsphere_virtual_machine**.

### Project Structure

I see no reason to deviate from Hashicorp's recommendations except to add a ``providers.tf`` file, since I prefer to keep providers separate for my own sanity.

```
modules
└── vm_deploy
    ├── main.tf
    ├── outputs.tf
    ├── providers.tf
    └── variables.tf    
```

### Setting Up the Provider

In the providers.tf file, I set the hashicorp/vsphere provider using the ``required_providers`` block, then configure it with the ``provider`` block. If you're unfamiliar with these blocks, you can copy and paste the necessary code from the [vsphere doc](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/vsphere/latest) on the terraform registry.

**providers.tf**  
###### *A note on secrets management: Below, I've added the provider for Hashicorp Vault to obtain the credentials for my vCenter instance. I won't be covering the usage of Vault in these posts but at some point in the future I plan on going over it.*


```javascript
terraform {
  required_providers {
    vsphere = {
      source  = "hashicorp/vsphere"
      version = "2.1.1"
    }
    vault = {
      source  = "hashicorp/vault"
      version = "3.6.0"
    }
  }
}

provider "vsphere" {
  user           = var.vsphere_user
  password       = var.vsphere_password
  vsphere_server = var.vsphere
}

provider "vault" {
  address = var.vault_addr
  auth_login {
    path      = "auth/approle/login"
    role_id   = var.vault_role_id
    secret_id = var.vault_secret_id
  }
}
```

In the ``main.tf`` file I'm choosing to start with "empty" data blocks. The datacenter_id attribute is identical inside any block where it occurs so I'm primarily concerned with the name attribute, which I'll evaluate as I figure out how to best handle my provisioning conditions.

**main.tf**

```javascript
data "vsphere_datacenter" "dc" {
    name = ""
}

data "vsphere_compute_cluster" "cc" {
    name = ""
    datacenter_id = data.vsphere_datacenter.dc.id
}

data "vsphere_host" "host" {
    name = ""
    datacenter_id = data.vsphere_datacenter.dc.id
}

data "vsphere_datastore" "ds" {
    name = ""
    datacenter_id = data.vsphere_datacenter.dc.id
}

data "vsphere_datastore_cluster" "dsc" {
    name = ""
    datacenter_id = data.vsphere_datacenter.dc.id
}

data "vsphere_folder" "folder" {
    path = ""
}

data "vsphere_network" "network" {
    name = ""
    datacenter_id = data.vsphere_datacenter.dc.id
}

data "vsphere_virtual_machine" "vm_template" {
    name = ""
    datacenter_id = data.vsphere_datacenter.dc.id
}
```

In part 2 I'll be examining the conditions I need to satisfy and how I'll have to structure my variables accordingly.
